Are you now a gig worker? Top 9 things you need to know

TNN | Updated: Feb 2, 2021, 22:33  IST

NEW DELHI: The fineprint of the finance bill usually leaves taxpayers wondering what’s in store. Times of India – EY Guide decodes how salaried employees can save more of their salary from the taxmen.A harsh fallout of the pandemic were job losses. If you have joined the freelance economy – be it as a freelance graphic designer, interior designer, an architect, a consultant etc – the fees you get from your clients will be taxed under the head ‘Profits and Gains from Business or Profession’. Unless you are running a business, such as buying or selling goods, you will be treated as a professional and not a businessman. It is important to know the difference as the threshold norms for various compliances vary between the two. Union Budget 2021-22: Complete coverage1. The silver lining of being a gig worker is that you can claim various expenses. Against capital expenditure incurred on purchase of assets such as furniture, computer, or laptops you can deduct depreciation from your income – in short, the deduction for impairment in asset value is spread over a number of years at the prescribed rates. Other routine expenses, related to your business or profession, such as office rent, stationery, data and telephone bills, travel etc can be entirely deducted. However, you cannot claim standard deduction, which is available only to the salaried. What's cheaper and dearer after Budget 2021?2. You need to maintain books of account if your income from business or profession exceeds 2.5 lakh or gross receipts exceed 25 lakh in any of the previous three financial years. If it’s a new set up, the income of the first year is considered to determine this obligation. Union Budget: Want a bigger cheque, mate? Try these hot tips3. Tax audit requirements kick in in case your gross revenue during a financial year exceeds 1 crore (for business) and 50 lakh (in case of a profession). The threshold of 1 cr for business becomes 2 cr if you opt for presumptive taxation and 10 cr if receipts in cash and payment in cash do not exceed 5% of your receipt or payment, respectively. Union Budget: Provident - Finance minister eyes your PF with interest4. Barring a few exceptions such as for commission/brokerage agents or those in transport business, an option to be taxed on presumptive basis is available. Presumptive taxation scheme can be used by businesses having a total turnover of less than 2 crore and eligible professionals with gross receipts of less than 50 lakh in a financial year. If you opt for it, you do not have to maintain books of accounts and 8% of gross receipts in case of a business (6% if receipts are via banking channels); or 50% of your gross professional income is treated as your taxable income. Of course, if the receipts/income declared by you is higher, then tax is imposed on the higher sum. The downside, you cannot claim any expenses. If you have opted for the presumptive tax regime you can in a subsequent year revert to the normal taxation regime — having done so, no option change is allowed for five years. Union Budget 2021: Are you richer or poorer? Here’s the bottomline5. As a gig worker, you too can opt for the concessional tax regime, where in lieu of forgoing certain deductions such as those available under section 80C for investments, you can opt to be taxed at concessional rates. If you exercise this option, you have once in a lifetime opportunity to opt out (a salaried employee can switch year on year). 6. Don’t forget to pay your advance tax each quarter. You are required to do so if your total tax liability on projected taxable income is 10,000 or more in a financial year. A minimum of 15% of the advance tax is payable by June 15, 45% by September 15, 75% by December 15 and 100% by March 15 of the financial year. 7. Your customers may have to deduct tax at source while paying you for your services. Access Form 26AS on the I-T e-filing portal to find out the TDS deducted, which is set off against your tax liabilities. 8. TDS obligations arise if your gross income from business exceeds 1 crore in a fiscal year ( 50 lakh for professional income). This requires you to deduct tax at source, at the applicable rates, against payments made to others — say towards office rent or to sub-contractors. You will need to file the TDS returns and deposit the tax deducted at source. 9. As a gig worker, you should register under GST and file periodic returns if your total receipts exceed 20 lakh in a financial year ( 10 lakh for certain states) and issue a GST compliant invoice to clients. Other requirements such as filing of returns, audit etc follow. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

