No govt stake in lenders’ ARC: Eco affairs secy

Surojit Gupta & Sidhartha | TNN |  Feb 3, 2021, 07:08  IST

NEW DELHI: Economic affairs secretary Tarun Bajaj on Tuesday made it clear that the proposed asset reconstruction company (ARC) will be set up by private and public sector banks and the government will not provide any support to the entity that has been pushed by the lenders. “It will be in the private sector… It will help in faster resolution of cases, while freeing up banks to lend,” Bajaj told TOI in a post-Budget interaction. The proposed “bad bank” has been in the works for several years with the government and the RBI now coming around to accept the idea. By maintaining an arm’s length, the government is also seeking to avoid any political backlash that may arise in the future. Bajaj also said that the government was adopting a hands-off approach with the National Infrastructure Investment Fund (NIIF) and letting it decide on where it wants to park funds. While NIIF’s investment track record has been under lens, the civil servant said it has committed equity of Rs 21,000 crore and debt of Rs 8,600 crore. Bajaj said that the steps on monetisation of assets will help build a strong pipeline for fund-raising and investment and also address investor complaints over absence of good assets in the market, especially when it comes to the government. “Several pension funds are scouting for longterm investments with stable returns over the next few years,” he said. Asked about the proposed new Securities Market Code, which will merge the provisions of Sebi Act, Government Securities Act and SCRA, Bajaj said the intent was to streamline the laws to avoid overlap since some of them were enacted several years ago. Asked about the proposed legislation on cryptocurrency, Bajaj said the details were still being discussed as several stakeholders were involved with the recommendations of the S C Garg committee acting as the basis. In the legislative agenda for the current session, the government had indicated that the legislation will seek to ban private cryptocurrencies, while putting in place a framework for LIC to launch a digital currency. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

