Oecd’s Sec Gen: If a solution is not delivered by mid-2021, 40 countries will move ahead with digital services tax

Lubna Kably | TNN |  Jan 28, 2021, 21:13  IST

MUMBAI: The issue of digital services tax (DST) occupied centre stage, in an address given by Angel Gurría, secretary general, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (Oecd). He was addressing representatives of 135 countries, at the 11th plenary meeting of the Inclusive Framework on BEPS. According to him, G-20 leaders have repeatedly recognised the importance of the issue of taxation in a digital economy. They have mandated the Inclusive Framework to deliver a solution by mid-2021. The importance of reaching an agreement is increasing by the day. And the Covid-19 pandemic has exacerbated many of the issues the Inclusive Framework has already been trying to resolve. “Left unchecked, the digitalisation of the economy will entrench long standing imbalances and unilateral action could aggravate current tax-related trade tensions,” he said. Gurría emphasised, “If we do not deliver a solution by mid-2021, over 40 countries are considering, or will move ahead, with a digital services tax. While such measures may reflect pressure from citizens to take action, most governments agree that a multilateral, consensus-based solution would be preferable and have indicated that DSTs would be removed once an agreement is brokered by the Inclusive Framework.” The US has in the past been perceived as a stumbling block in the discussion and negotiation process among countries. In this context, Oecd’s secretary general stated, “I was encouraged to hear the US Secretary of the Treasury, Janet Yellen, state, as part of her confirmation hearings that the US is committed to the co-operative multilateral effort to address base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS) through the OECD/G20 process, and to working to resolve the digital taxation disputes in that context.” The blue-print for a multilateral, consensus-based solution to challenges arising from the digitalisation of the economy based on two pillars, was released last October. Pillar One provides a new taxing right to allocate a percentage of residual profits of multinational companies to market jurisdictions (countries where customers are based). Pillar Two provides for a global minimum tax to ensure multinational profits incur a minimum level of taxation, no matter how much tax planning is deployed. The Inclusive Framework has received around 3,500 pages of comments from over 200 commentators. It has carefully reviewed these invaluable inputs and is refining the Pillar One and Pillar Two proposals. Gurría also highlighted the need to tackle other pressing tax challenges. Nearly 70% of energy-related CO-2 emissions from advanced and emerging economies today are entirely untaxed. Some of the most polluting fuels remain among the least taxed, he pointed out. “We can do better! Putting a big, fat price on carbon is one of the most effective ways to tackle climate change by creating incentives to reduce emissions”. “Rising inequality is another pressing issue. Tax policy in a post-Covid era offers a multitude of opportunities to enact tax and fiscal policies aimed at strengthening – rather than weakening – the social fabric of our societies,” he stated. Gurría speech also provided insights on what has been achieved so far. Here are the key highlights. * At the April 2009, G-20 Summit in London, leaders declared an end to bank secrecy. A few months later, the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Taxation Purposes met for the first time to discuss proposals for a new governance structure and working methods. Nearly ten years later, EUR 107 billion of additional revenues (tax, interest and penalties) have been identified. Bank deposits in international financial centres have fallen by US $ 410 billion over the past decade and 36,000 exchanges of tax rulings have been shared between countries. Information on 84 million financial accounts were exchanged in 2019 with a total value of around EUR 10 trillion. * Aggressive tax planning by multinational corporations began to hit headlines. Annually US $ 100-240 billion in revenue was being lost to base erosion. Responding to this challenge, in 2013, the BEPS Action Plan was launched. It identified 15 specific measures to equip governments with the domestic and international instruments needed to prevent corporations from paying little or no taxes. This was a turning point in the history of international tax co-operation and the regulation of globalisation. G-20 Finance Ministers endorsed the BEPS package in Lima in 2015. “…In a globalised world, tax co-operation is the only way to protect tax sovereignty. This was true then, and it is true now. Without such co-operation, the effectiveness of our domestic tax policies is at risk.” * Since its formal establishment in 2016, the BEPS Inclusive Framework has driven a sea change in international tax policy, particularly with respect to the four BEPS minimum standards. 138 countries and jurisdictions have committed to implementing these minimum standards, which have established coherence, realigned substance with taxation and increased transparency. * The facts speak for themselves, since 2016, over 285 regimes have been reviewed to ensure there is substance associated with the activities they are intended to attract, and virtually all harmful preferential regimes have been amended or abolished. * The Multilateral Instrument, which the Inclusive Framework developed to tackle a range of BEPS challenges embedded in bilateral tax treaty networks – now covers 95 jurisdictions. Sixty-one jurisdictions have already ratified the Instrument, which impacts over 1,700 tax treaties. * More than 2,500 bilateral exchange relationships have been established to exchange Country-by-Country Reporting. These relationships have provided tax administrations with aggregate data on the global allocation of income, profit, taxes paid and other valuable data of global multinational enterprises. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

