Union Budget 2021-22: Spend it like Nirmala Sitharaman

TNN | Updated: Feb 2, 2021, 07:40  IST

NEW DELHI: The politically bold Budget defied the punditry that aggressive protests against the agricultural laws have pushed the Modi government on the back foot, and that it would be wary of attempting another set of reforms. The audacious intent to privatise loss-making public sector units, which continue to haemorrhage scarce public resources, seems to have surpassed even the imaginations of those who counselled Prime Minister Narendra Modi not to waste the crisis triggered by the Covid-19 pandemic. FM's double shot to push the economy: Spendovax + PrivamaxThat Modi could get his finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman to take a stab at the political challenge at a time when he has been accused of crony capitalism and polls are looming in states with strong trade union presence make the effort even more spectacular. The attempt to privatise all PSUs except those in four strategic areas where they would be allowed in “bare minimum” form will, of course, meet with resistance. Opposition parties have attacked it, and trade unions, already seething with resentment over the labour reforms, are certain to take to the streets. The risk of a backlash, if from vested interests only, could not have been lost on the government. The farm protests were loud enough a warning to have gone unheard. If it did not deter the government, it is because it has been encouraged by the belief that Modi’s reputation for integrity buffers it against the charges that sank UPA. If the high decibel campaign over Rafale failed to find traction, people are unlikely to be swayed by a fresh set of accusations, goes the reasoning. Appreciation for the government's response to the pandemic has only hardened the confidence. The Budget is not devoid of electoral pragmatism either. The anxiety not to cause annoyance to people still reeling from the depredations of the pandemic comes out through the restraint not to put fresh burden on them at a time when many seemed resigned to having to split the tab of the enhanced health bill. Allocation of highway projects in Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Assam and Kerala in the build-up to polls don’t seem to be a coincidence inspired by growth considerations alone. The focus on tea garden workers in Bengal and Assam overlaps with BJP’s electoral priorities in the two states and can be seen as the foundation for the “double engine” model BJP has sold in other theatres to emphasise benefits of favouring the same party in state polls which also holds the reins at the Centre. Union Budget 2021 explained in 15 chartsThe government also used the opportunity to reinforce its assurance to farmers that implementation of the farm laws will not spell the demise of MSP and APMCs — the twin anxieties which have fuelled resentment in farmers from Punjab, Haryana and western UP. The protesters promptly snubbed the declaration of friendly intent, but the message, along with details of steady increase in spend on procurement, may find more resonance among those who are not so beholden to the status quo, besides possibly softening up those on the borders of Delhi who may be getting tired of the standoff. Extension of social security benefits to gig and platform workers will please the vast constituency. Infrastructure expansion should lead to job creation on a large scale, besides creating the optics befitting Modi's promise of ‘New India’. The middle class has no reason to grieve, while the strengthening of public health facilities and the emphasis on providing tap water supply can consolidate the constituency which stood by Modi in 2019. Under the new fiscal framework, the Centre will have more leeway than states to spend and that means bolder and longer footprint of the Modi government on the country’s development. There is one influential constituency, however, which must be troubled. Sitharaman’s announcement about the review of 400-odd customs exemptions will lead to a change in the terms of industry’s engagement with a powerful government — a thought that can push them into the throes of anxiety. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

