Why should tax be the instrument to promote savings or consumption?: CBDT chairman

Sidhartha & Surojit Gupta | TNN |  Feb 3, 2021, 08:56  IST

NEW DELHI: CBDT chairman PC Mody has been leading the change in direct tax administration for the last few years. In an interview, he tells TOI that the government is trying to let the taxpayer decide where she should invest and also confirms that an appeal in the Vodafone case has been filed. How challenging is the target?From the projection made earlier, the revised estimate is far more realistic projection. The target is 9.05 lakh crore, I am already at Rs 6.6 lakh crore and considering the historical trend of substantial part of the collection being in the next financial year. This year was exceptional, next year’s projection is realistic. The improvement in economic activity and the changes in tax administration make it absolutely doable. What is the strategy? Will it be business as usual kind of approach or are you looking at some special focus areas?There is a paradigm shift in the processes and the manner which the tax administration is geared. From a territorial jurisdiction, we have moved to dynamic jurisdiction. We have moved to consistency, objectivity, some sort of uniformity. This is an absolute game changer. End-to-end is faceless. The overall experience that the taxpayer is getting that he can go about his economic activity without bothering about tax. What else are you planning on data analytics to track evaders better?You have had this problem of bogus tax credit for GST. Earlier, it was on the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs’ side and we were doing things on our own. Now, there is continuous flow of information, enabling us to exchange the profile of the taxpayer and the result is very much evident. Now it will be tough for people gaming the system to escape the rigours of taxation. He will be compelled to discharge his obligation. If you are giving him proper service, then he will get into a mould of discharging his obligation. We are trying to create an enabling environment so that people are motivated to discharge their obligation. The focus is on voluntary compliance. The scenario is such that if someone skips one traffic signal on red light, he will get be caught at the next signal. Are you adjusting your manpower accordingly because of the change in processes?Calibration of manpower has already been done. Depending on the need, we are going to realign further. It won’t be a case of people becoming redundant. On the contrary their service is required more. It’s just that the manner in which work is getting done is changing. It is not the change that is painful, it is the resistance to change that is painful. There is an outreach inwards too, just as our outreach with taxpayers -- a change in the mindset of the taxpayer and also a change in the mind on the tax administrators. There were two arbitration awards, in Vodafone and Cairn cases. What is the status there?In one case we have filed an appeal against the arbitration award, the second matter is under examination. What was the rationale behind the appeal given that many people are saying that the government should have let the issue die?Expectation and reality are two different things. The law as it stands, there was a case to appeal against the award. How can the arbitration award be contrary to the law that is there? It is their interpretation and we believe there is a case against appeal? Was it because you thought that the award’s language overrides what Parliament has legislated?Is that acceptable? Law per se is like that – either the glass is half full or half empty. It depends on how you want to interpret it. Can a bilateral treaty take away the tadxation rights of a jurisdiction? That is the larger question. Has the case been heard?It has just been admitted. Does the proposed amendments on taxation of provident funds signal a shift to a new regime of exempt, exempt, tax or tax time of withdrawal?Up to Rs 2.5 lakh contribution is exempted. A majority of the taxpayers are below the threshold, so they are not impacted. It is only a select few who have been brought to tax. It is prospective. The idea is to bring in greater equity. The tax structure should be simple. External internal interventions such as promoting savings or something else can be done more efficiently through other instruments. Why should tax be the instrument? It makes things more complicated. The idea is to leave the money with the taxpayer as he is the best judge, whether he wants to spend or invest, or decide whatever is the best instrument for him. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

