Calls for release of Suu Kyi, Myanmar lawmakers grow

Agencies |  Feb 3, 2021, 06:30  IST

YANGON: The din of banging pots and honking car horns reverberated through Myanmar’s biggest city of Yangon late on Tuesday in the first widespread protest against the military coup that overthrew elected leader Aung San Suu Kyi. The party of the detained Nobel Peace laureate called for her release by the junta that seized power on Monday and is keeping her at an undisclosed location. It also demanded recognition of her victory in a November election. A senior official from her National League for Democracy (NLD) said he had learned she was in good health a day after her arrest in a military takeover that derailed Myanmar’s tentative progress towards full democracy. A meeting of the UN Security Council was going on late on Tuesday amid calls for a strong global response to the military’s latest seizure of power in a country blighted for decades by army rule. The 15-member UNSC is negotiating a possible statement, drafted by Britain, that would condemn the coup, call for the military to respect the rule of law and human rights, and immediately release those unlawfully detained, diplomats said. US state department officials said the takeover had been determined to constitute a coup d’etat. Under US law, the assessment that a coup has taken place automatically puts restrictions on assistance. In the biggest public display of anger so far, people in Yangon banged on pots and pans and honked car horns and chanted “evil be gone”. People have not taken to the streets so far in a country with a history of bloody repression of protests. The coup followed a landslide win for Suu Kyi’s NLD in an election on November 8, a result the military has refused to accept, citing unsubstantiated allegations of fraud. The army handed power to its commander, General Min Aung Hlaing, and imposed a state of emergency for a year. At the UN, Myanmar envoy Christine Schraner Burgener said the military’s proposal to hold new elections should be discouraged. “Let us be clear, the recent outcome of the election was a landslide victory for the NLD,” Schraner Burgener said. She appealed to the UNSC to “collectively send a clear signal in support of democracy in Myanmar”. The military began to lift restrictions Tuesday on the hundreds of members of parliament who had been confined at a guarded housing complex, with the new government telling them to go back to their homes, NLD spokesman Kyi Toe said. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

