Global Covid vaccinations hit 100m mark

Amit Bhattacharya | TNN | Updated: Feb 3, 2021, 10:22  IST

Fifty nine days after the first confirmed shot against Covid-19 was given, the global inoculation drive to subdue the pandemic reached a significant milestone on Tuesday with the number of vaccine doses administered crossing 100 million (10 crore). A total of at least 101.6 million vaccine doses had been administered globally by Tuesday, with India’s number crossing the 4 million mark. The first reported doses of any Covid-19 vaccine were administered in Russia, where the drive began on December 5, as per reports, even though the country’s Sputnik V vaccine was still undergoing mass trials to test its safety and efficacy. Three days later, the first shots were given in the United Kingdom. While reports quoting Chinese officials say the vaccination programme in that country began in November, there’s no official confirmation of this. Inoculations began in the US on December 14 with the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine. The country now leads the world with 32.8 million shots administered so far, a little less than a third of the global total, as per news agency Bloomberg’s vaccine tracker. The US is followed by China, which had given 24 million shots till latest reports from the country came on Sunday. The country is racing to inoculate a big portion of its population ahead of the Chinese new year (February 12), when millions of Chinese travel to their hometowns. The UK has administered the third highest number of shots so far at 9.8m, followed by Israel (nearly 5m) and India. In doses per 100 people, Israel was way ahead of the rest of the world at over 55. As much as 20.2% of the country's population had been fully inoculated against the virus for now, having received two doses of the Pfizer vaccine. Studies in the country indicate that people fully inoculated against the virus had shown very low infection rate (0.04%), raising hopes across the world that vaccines could provide an effective shield against the pandemic. The UAE had the second highest number of does per 100 people at 32, followed by the UK at 14.7 and the US at 10. In China the number was 1.7 while India had so far given the jab to around 0.4 out of every 100 people in the country. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

