Military takes control of Myanmar: Why a coup and what next

TIMESOFINDIA.COM |  Feb 2, 2021, 17:58  IST

NEW DELHI: After struggling for 10 years to become a democracy, Myanmar is controlled by the Tatmadaw again. Tatmadaw, Myanmar's all-powerful military ruled the country for 49 years but had promised a smooth transition of power to a democratically-elected government. However, the military unceremoniously reneged its word on a day when the people's government was about to take office on February 1. Myanmar's de-facto leader Aung Sang Su Kyi was detained along with her allies in a military coup and a year-long military emergency was declared. The military justified the coup by alleging voter fraud in the November 2020 elections. Why a coup?The military claimed fake voters and widespread miscalculations in the vote count as a basis for the coup. While Suu Kyi's National League for Democracy (NLD) party won the November election by a landslide victory, the Union Solidarity and Development Party, military's proxy, won only 33 of 476 seats. In 1990, the army had ignored NLD's win for a constituent assembly but the NLD again won the 2015 elections. However, the military still held more power as the junta-scripted charter reserved 25 per cent of parliamentary seats for the army who also controlled key ministries such as interior and defence. In the latter months of their first term, Suu Kyi had moved to give more authority to the civilian government which would have taken away the military's veto power in the legislature. Observers also point to military boss Min Aung Hlaing's personal ambitions who faces foreign accusations of war crimes against Rohingya Muslims. The commander-in-chief, senior general Hlaing, is the subject of cases pending in international courts that could seek his arrest. His mandatory retirement was imminent and it is highly unlikely an NLD-controlled parliament would have elected him president. The military justified its coup within the parameters of the constitution, using a clause that allows for power to be transferred by the president to the chief of the armed forces in a state of emergency. After the military detained a dozen people, including President Win Myint who is also a Suu Kyi ally, Vice-President Myint Swe on February 1 handed over the power to Hlaing. Military announced a state of emergency to take control for one year, promising elections afterwards. After sacking Suu Kyi's cabinet, the military has now appointed a new group of ministers, none of whom were identified as acting or interim appointments. What next for MyanmarThe US government has threatened renewed sanctions on Myanmar and the World Bank said the coup could hurt development prospects and gains in tackling poverty. Political risk has been heightened by the takeover, with concern the junta will be preoccupied with establishing control and domestic security. Any pro-democracy protests could be met with force. The nascent economy and jobs could be hit if foreign investors are concerned about stability or reputation risks. Vital infrastructure projects might be stalled or even be halted if private or public funding is affected. Ratings agency Fitch called it a "substantial backtracking of progress" that will "weigh heavily on policymaking, social stability as well as international perceptions of the country". (With inputs from agencies)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

