Pakistan SC confirms decision to release Daniel Pearl murder accused

Omer Farooq Khan | TNN |  Feb 3, 2021, 00:22  IST

ISLAMABAD: Pakistan’s Supreme Court on Tuesday ordered the release of British-born Pakistani Ahmed Omar Saeed Sheikh, the prime accused in the 2002 beheading of American journalist Daniel Pearl, from a death cell in Karachi prison and directed authorities to move him to a government rest house within the next two to three days. This comes despite US Secretary of State Tony Blinken speaking over phone with Pakistan’s foreign minister Shah Mahmood Qureshi, days after the Supreme Court ordered the release of Sheikh, and discussing the accountability of convicted terrorists responsible for Pearl’s murder, according to the US State Department. Tuesday’s decision comes after a three-judge panel reviewed and confirmed its order last week to acquit Sheikh, who had been on death row for 18 years since originally being convicted by an anti-terrorism court for his role in the kidnapping and murder of the US journalist. “He should be moved to a comfortable residential environment something like a rest house where he can live a normal life,” Justice Umar Ata Bandyal, heading the three-judge bench. Sheikh’s father, Ahmad Saeed Sheikh, who attended Tuesday’s hearing, said: “It is not complete freedom. It is a step towards freedom.” The top court also directed authorities to ensure complete security of the rest house, and allowed Sheikh’s family access to him from 8am to 5pm. According to the court’s directives, the accused will not be given access to mobile and internet services while his family will be given accommodation and transport on the government’s expense. Locations of such safe houses are usually kept secret; Pakistan’s powerful security establishment has several such facilities across the country. In April 2020, the Sindh HC had overturned the death sentence of Sheikh into seven years’ imprisonment and acquitted three others: Fahad Naseem, Syed Suleman Saqib and Sheikh Muhammad Adil. The accused, however, were not released as the Sindh government kept them behind bars under the Maintenance of Public Order (MPO), a law that empowers the government to detain any suspect for 90 days. On July 1, a fresh notification was issued by the provincial government to extend their detention by three months and later their confinement was extended for yet another 90 days. Last December, the high court had accepted a petition by the men against their continued detention and ordered their immediate release, declaring all detention orders of the Sindh government “null and void”. The HC release order, however, was challenged by the Sindh government in the apex court. Daniel Pearl, who was the South Asia bureau chief for The Wall Street Journal, was kidnapped in Karachi in January 2002 while working on a militancy story. Pearl’s wife, Marianne Pearl, a US national who was living in Karachi, wrote a letter to police on February 2, 2002, stating that her husband had disappeared on January 23, 2002. Later, a graphic video showing Pearl’s decapitation was delivered to the US consulate in Karachi nearly a month after his abduction. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

