2 Lt Gens at war withdraw complaints as Army chief orders court of inquiry

Rajat Pandit | TNN | Updated: Feb 3, 2021, 10:22  IST

NEW DELHI: The Army is finalising a court of inquiry (CoI) into a bitter tussle between top two generals of the crucial Jaipur-based South Western Command (SWC) — an unprecedented development in the top echelons of the over-13-lakh-strong force in recent history. The two warring generals, SWC chief Lt Gen Alok Kler and his second-in-command, Lt Gen K K Repswal, withdrew their complaints against each other on Tuesday, sources said. Top sources, however, said the final decision will be taken by Army chief Gen M M Naravane as the “higher convening authority” of the CoI after the report is submitted to him in a few days. The CoI is headed by Lucknow-based Central Command chief Lt Gen I S Ghuman, who is senior to the two officers involved in the unseemly fracas. Both come from illustrious military familiesThe “serious” allegations and counter-allegations range from administrative lapses and major functional troubles to even misuse of authority on certain fronts, sources said. While Lt Gen Kler, an armoured corps officer, is slated to retire on March 31, Lt Gen Repswal, who is from the Corps of Engineers, has been transferred to the Eastern Command in Kolkata. Both of them come from illustrious military families, with several of their relatives having served in top positions in the Army and IAF. The rift between the two generals had been festering for long, with both making representations and complaining about each other’s conduct to the Army chief last year. Gen Naravane had even deputed then vice-chief Lt Gen SK Saini, who retired on January 31, to inquire into the matter. “The CoI was ordered by Gen Naravane after it was found that certain serious issues raised by the two officers required greater scrutiny. The day-to-day functioning of the SWC has been badly affected,” an officer said. SWC, one of the six operational or regional commands of the Army headed by senior lieutenant generals, was established in 2005 as part of the overall plan to restructure formations based along the Indo-Pak border to strengthen strike capabilities for multiple thrusts across the border. Though there have been some rifts between Army commanders and their senior subordinates over the last 2-3 decades, this is the first time that things have come to such a head. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

