8 states to get Rs 8k cr for one new city each

Dipak K Dash | TNN |  Feb 3, 2021, 05:33  IST

NEW DELHI: For the first time, the Finance Commission has created the provision for Rs 8,000 crore incentive grant for eight states for incubation of one new city each as a pilot. The housing and urban affairs ministry will come up with the framework for this, which will be taken up on a challenge mode. “We will start work on this. For several years, no new city has been developed and hence this need was felt. We have taken a policy decision that all new cities should be developed on the principle of Smart Cities. It will be too early to say whether these will be completely greenfield cities,” Union housing and urban affairs secretary Durga Shankar Mishra said. The 15th Finance Commission in its report has talked about the need for both rejuvenation of old cities and setting up of new cities. It said the challenge of setting up infrastructure in greenfield cities can be less daunting than the problem of setting up such facilities in old established cities. On the other hand, the development of greenfield cities runs into the problem of land acquisition and rehabilitation. “Given these complexities, it is better to start on a pilot basis and, hence, we recommend a performancebased challenge fund of Rs 8,000 crore to states for incubation of new cities. The amount available for each proposed new city is Rs 1,000 crore and a state can have only one new city under the proposed scheme,” the commission said in its report. Srikanth Viswanathan of Janagraha said, “This could be an interesting experiment to encourage states to invest in area based development in the form of satellite towns or special economic zones or industrial towns, and help spur investments and job growth, besides decongesting. While Rs 1,000 crore would not be sufficient to build a new city, states should see this as seed funding for an innovative venture.” The Commission’s report has been accepted by the government. Another recommendation by the panel to fix price for water on a graded basis, wherein higher consumption entails higher charges and periodic revision of the charges has also been accepted at a time when the government is going to launch a Rs 2.64 lakh crore scheme to provide universal household tap water connection to all houses across 4,378 municipal areas by 2026. Mishra said the programme will focus on rejuvenation of water bodies to augment sustainable fresh water supply and creating green spaces and sponge cities to reduce floods and enhance amenity value through an Urban Aquifer Management plan. There will also be focus on meeting 20% of water demand by reusing the treated water. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

