Budget poll manifesto, full of jumlas: Assam Congress

Kangkan Kalita | TNN |  Feb 2, 2021, 23:25  IST

GUWAHATI: Opposition in poll-bound Assam, lashed out at the government after Union finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman tabled the first ever digital Union Budget on Monday. Assam Pradesh Congress Committee (APCC) president and Rajya Sabha MP, Ripun Bora, blamed the BJP-led government for allegedly turning Parliament into a venue for releasing state election manifestos. “This Budget is nothing but an election manifesto full of jumlas!” said Bora. Other Opposition parties are sceptical of the mega infrastructure projects for Assam and other poll-bound states and said the burning issues of communities cannot be resolved by the Budget. Congress deputy leader in Lok Sabha Gaurav Gogoi accused BJP of failing to address the main demands of the states which have got a special mention. “For Assam, the Union Budget mentioned the tea community but there were no steps to ensure a revised minimum daily wage for them (Rs 351),” said Gogoi. Sitharaman announced Rs 1,000 crore for tea garden workers, especially for those from Assam and West Bengal. But leader of Opposition in state assembly, Debabrata Saikia, said many primary schools in the tea gardens are still under the management of the garden and the government has not taken any steps to make them provincial. “Besides, in 52% of the company-owned gardens, there are no medical officers. Whether the government will do anything to improve the lot of women and children who lack medical aid, is to be seen,” he said. It is an election-oriented budget, stressed Saikia, adding that the announcements have been made targeting election-bound states like Assam, West Bengal, Kerala and Tamil Nadu. The 11-lakh strong tea plantation workers in the state plays a big role in the elections in Assam and the tea tribes have been promised scheduled tribe status by BJP, which is desperate to keep the tea votes intact in the upcoming polls. The AIUDF termed the budget “very disappointing” for the nation, Assam, minorities and weaker sections. “The common people battling Covid-19 were expecting some relief in the income tax slab but there was no relief. The finance minister claimed it was a budget for ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ but the fact is the budget failed to encourage domestic investors. On the contrary, it has given more incentives to foreign investors,” said AIUDF chief Badruddin Ajmal. He added that the budget failed to present a road map for job creation as the number of jobless people is growing under this government. The AIUDF also alleged that the budget failed to give financial packages to the flood-affected people in Assam. “There was no announcement of a plan for controlling the floods that wreak havoc every year in the state. It also failed to announce funds for the revival of Cachar and Nagaon paper mills and announce industrial development for the northeast, especially Assam,” he said. New regional party Assam Jatiya Parishad (AJP) also called the budget a ‘futile’ exercise. AJP general secretary Jagadish Bhuyan said this budget would again see an increase in the number of poor and the rich would become richer. “It had no proposal for curbing petrol and diesel prices,” he said. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

