Estimate behind 35k cr Covid vaccine pie: 700/recipient, 50cr citizens

Surojit Gupta & Sidhartha | TNN |  Feb 3, 2021, 03:53  IST

NEW DELHI: The Rs 35,000-crore allocation set aside for anti-Covid vaccination in the Budget is intended to cover 50 crore people with the cost of the shots and the accompanying logistic and administrative expenses working out to Rs 700 per beneficiary who is inoculated. “We have tried to make a reasonable estimate of what it will cost. Our estimates are based on a calculation of Rs 700 per person – each requiring two doses. It (vaccine cost) is Rs 200-250 (for each shot), plus incidentals such as syringe, cold storage, transportation, honorarium for the staff. The pattern of funding will be decided by the health ministry and Niti Aayog in consultation with the states. Whether the number of people to be vaccinated is 50 crore or more, or less, will depend on multiple factors. There are so many variables,” expenditure secretary T V Somanathan told TOI. In her budget finance minister Nirmala Sitharaman had announced the allocation and said that more funds will be made available, if required. The government has targeted 30 crore priority health and frontline workers and the target envisaged would mean around 20 crore of the above 50 population get the shot along with those who are younger but have serious comorbidities. The pace of vaccination will depend, among other factors, on whether the shots will be available for purchase by private citizens in a few months. These numbers are not part of the government’s estimates. As the shots in use, Covishield and Covaxin, are double-dose vaccines, 100 crore jabs will be given if the target is met. The Centre also defended the health and wellness budget from criticism that the 137% rise includes heads like drinking water and sanitation. “These were there in the previous Budget as well,” said Somanathan. The government also felt that disease control through sanitation and drinking water is very much a health concern as it would directly impact illnesses like malaria and typhoid, dysentery, cholera and hepatitis. The increase for drinking water and sanitation is steep, reflecting the renewed focus on preventive health while nutrition was equally a part of the health and wellness initiatives announced by the finance minister. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

