Govt, Opposition reach consensus to discuss farmers' issues in RS: Top developments

TIMESOFINDIA.COM | Updated: Feb 3, 2021, 13:18  IST

NEW DELHI: The protest against the farm laws disrupted the Parliament for the second day as the farmers resolved to intensify their protest around the country. Meanwhile, the Supreme Court is all set to hear a bunch of petitions about the violence during the tractor rally on Republic Day. Here is a look at the top developments. 'Sensationalist': MEA on comments by foreign celebs over farm stirThe MEA on Wednesday condemned the remarks by foreign celebrities and entities over the farmers protest in India, calling the incident "unfortunate" and "sensationalist." In a stern statement, the government warned against the "temptation of sensationalist social media hashtags and comments" and said the protests were by "a very small section of farmers" in parts of India. Govt, Opposition reach consensus to discuss farmers' issues in RSThe government and opposition parties in Rajya Sabha reached consensus to allocate more time to discuss the motion of thanks and parties can raise their issues on farmers' protest during the discussion. However, before the discussion could begin, several House members created a ruckus, following which Rajya Sabha was adjourned till 9.40 am. Three AAP members asked to withdraw from RSThree Aam Aadmi Party members were marshalled out of Rajya Sabha after chairman M Venkaiah Naidu asked them to withdraw as they trooped into the Well of the House raising slogans against the new farm laws. The three MPs — Sanjay Singh, Sushil Kumar Gupta and ND Gupta — have been asked to remain absent from the House for the remaining part of the day. 1 lakh reward for information on Deep SidhuDelhi Police announce cash reward of Rs 1 lakh each for information leading to arrest of Deep Sidhu, Jugraj Singh, Gurjot Singh and Gurjant Singh, reported ANI. Furthermore, a reward of Rs 50,000 each has been announced for the arrest of Jajbir Singh, Buta Singh, Sukhdev Singh and Iqbal Singh for their alleged involvement in January 26 violence. SC to hear pleas related to tractor rally violence on R-DayThe Supreme Court will hear a batch of pleas pertaining to tractor rally violence in the national capital on the Republic Day, including the one which has sought setting up of a commission headed by a retired apex court judge to inquire into the incident. The petitions would be taken up for hearing by a bench comprising Chief Justice SA Bobde and Justices AS Bopanna and V Ramasubramanian. Another petition sought a direction to the concerned authority as well as the media not to declare farmers as "terrorist" without any evidence. 'Mahapanchayats will be held across the country'Bharatiya Kisan Union (BKU) will organise "khap panchayat" in Mathura with BKU chief Naresh Tikait as its chief guest. Meanwhile, Haryana khap will organise "kisan mahapanchayat" today. BKU president Rakesh Tikait and several other leaders of various farmer unions are slated to address the gathering. BKU president said there will be a Mahapanchayat in Jind tomorrow, which he would be attending. "Such panchayats will be held across the country until the government accepts our demands," Tikait said. Greta Thunberg, Rihana, Meena Harris tweet in support of protestThe niece of US vice president Kamala Harris tweeted her support for the ongoing farmers protests, saying that "the most populous democracy is under assault". Recently, a couple of other international personalities have come out in support of the protesting farmers in India, including singer Rihana and environment activist Greta Thunberg. (With inputs from agencies)

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

