India prepared to defend territorial integrity at all costs, says Rajnath at Aero India show

TIMESOFINDIA.COM | Updated: Feb 3, 2021, 13:01  IST

NEW DELHI: Union defence minister Rajnath Singh on Wednesday launched a veiled attack on China over the Ladakh standoff, saying that India is prepared to defend the territorial integrity at all costs. The defence minister was speaking at the 13th edition of the Aero India international air show that took off at Air Force Station Yelahanka in Bengaluru on Wednesday. "India is vigilant and prepared to counter and defeat any misadventure to defend our people and the territorial integrity at all costs," said Singh. Calling terrorism a global threat, the Union minister spoke about the challenged faced by India from multiple fronts. “India also faces threats and challenges emanating from multiple fronts. India is a victim of state-sponsored and state inflicted terrorism, which is now a global threat,” said Singh. Speaking on the occasion, Rajnath hailed India’s strides in domestic manufacturing of defence equipment and the now robust security apparatus. Recently, the government formally sealed deal, worth Rs 48,000 crore, with Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd for 83 Tejas light combat aircraft. This is the biggest ever indigenous defence procurement programme. “Domestic manufacturing of bigger and complex defence platforms has now become the focus of our policy under ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’. We plan to spend $130 billion on military modernization in next 7-8 years,” he said. "The Government of India has enhanced FDI in Defence Sector up to 74 per cent through the Automatic Route and 100 per cent through the Government route, which would act as a catalyst for foreign players to invest in India," he said. Singh expressed his pleasure at a large turnout of participants at Aero India 2021 despite the Covid-19 pandemic, and also said that the event will display the ‘vast potential’ of India. The defence minister thanked his counterparts from Maldives, Ukraine, Equatorial Guinea, Iran, Comoros and Madagascar for joining the show in person, and also those who joined it virtually. The event that begins today will go on till February 5. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

