Punjab gets lion's share of central fund, yet farm fires spiked

Dhananjay Mahapatra | TNN |  Feb 3, 2021, 07:28  IST

NEW DELHI: Punjab received 46% of Rs 1727 crore central fund for curbing stubble burning in the last three years, but saw a 15% spike in farm fire incidents over 2017 figures while Haryana and Uttar Pradesh significantly reduced crop residue burning incidents during the same period, the Centre informed the Supreme Court on Tuesday. The ministry of environment, forest and climate change, through solicitor general Tushar Mehta and additional solicitor general Aishwarya Bhati, gave details in an affidavit about the steps taken by the newly set up Commission for Air Quality Management in the National Capital Region and Adjoining Areas. It said feedback has been sought from the Punjab chief secretary on making available Crop Residue Management (CRM) machines at farmers' doorsteps as well as popularising the use of Pusa bio-decomposer technology along with CRM machines for in situ management of stubble. MoEF said after a surge in incidents of stubble burning in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh in 2017, the Centre had decided to fund a programme for promotion of agricultural mechanization and in situ management of crop residue for three years from 2018-19. The Centre allocated Rs 1,727 crore, of which Punjab got Rs 793 crore, Haryana Rs 500 crore, UP Rs 374 crore, Delhi Rs 4.5 crore, Indian Council of Agricultural Research and other central agencies Rs 55 crore. Though Punjab received the lion's share, the farm fire numbers went up by 15% in 2020-21 as compared to 67,079 stubble burning incidents in 2017-18. MoEF said both Haryana and UP saw significant reduction in stubble burning incidents over the years. The Commission has also advocated coordination between "Indian Space Research Organisation, Punjab State Remote Sensing Application Centre, its counterpart in Haryana and National Crop Forecasting Centre for identification of farm fires on real time basis for quick administrative response/action." On managing Delhi's air quality and reducing the pollution caused by heavy vehicles, the Commission has directed South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC) not to permit any commercial vehicle without RFID tag to enter Delhi at 13 toll plazas where RFID system and infrastructure is in place since January 1. MoEF said the Commission along with other stakeholders like Central Pollution Control Board and Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) carried out a comprehensive review of potential use of indigenously developed "Photonics'" based air quality mapping and monitoring system called Air-Quality Unique Monitoring (AUM) system for a pilot trial in Delhi. "CPCB and DPCC have been requested to fund this pilot project," it said. The Commission has asked all thermal power plants in the areas under its jurisdiction to adhere to timelines for installation of Flue Gas Desulphurisation (FGD) system, it said. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

