Sputnik V safe, 91.6% effective against Covid-19, says Lancet study

Swati Bharadwaj | TNN |  Feb 2, 2021, 23:30  IST

HYDERABAD: Even as Russian Covid-19 vaccine Sputnik V is eyeing an Emergency Use Authorisation (EUA) rollout in India in March this year, prestigious medical journal The Lancet said the vaccine has shown an efficacy of 91.6% against symptomatic Covid-19 in a two-dose regimen. Citing interim analysis data of Phase 3 trials of the vaccine involving over 20,000 adults in Russia, the British journal said on Tuesday that the trial results show a “consistent strong protective effect" across all participant age groups. The peer-reviewed journal also said a sub-analysis of over 2,000 participants aged over 60 years suggested the vaccine was similarly effective and well tolerated in the elderly as well. The most common adverse events reported in the study were flu-like illness, injection site reactions, headache, and asthenia (physical weakness). In a comment, The Lancet also pointed out that though the development of Sputnik V “has been criticised for unseemly haste, corner cutting, and an absence of transparency”, the outcome reported “is clear and the scientific principle of vaccination is demonstrated…” The Phase 3 study on the recombinant adenovirus vectored vaccine, codenamed Gam-COVID-Vac, was taken up at 25 hospitals and polyclinics in Moscow on 21,977 adults aged 18 years and above. However, it said further research was needed to confirm results in those belonging to unrepresented risk groups and non-white ethnicities. A Phase II/III trial of the vaccine, involving 1,600 participants, is currently being carried out in India by Hyderabad-based pharma giant Dr Reddy’s Laboratories along with the Russian sovereign wealth fund Russian Direct Investment Fund (RDIF). While the Phase 2 study involving 100 volunteers is over, the Phase 3 trials on 1500 participants in is ongoing. A top Dr Reddy’s Laboratories official recently said that the company hopes to complete the Indian leg of the clinical trials by February end and hopes to roll out the vaccine in EUA mode in March after approval from the Indian drug regulator Drugs Controller General of India (DCGI). Sputnik V uses two vectors -- adenovirus 26 (Ad26) and adenovirus 5 (Ad5) – that are administered 21 days apart. The Lancet article pointed out that this is intended to overcome any pre-existing adenovirus immunity in the population and that among the major Covid vaccines under development, only Sputnik V uses this approach while others, such as the Oxford–AstraZeneca vaccine, use the same material for both doses. It said recombinant adenoviruses have been widely used as vaccine vectors because they can accommodate large genetic payloads and, although unable to replicate, they trigger the innate immunity sensors sufficiently to ensure robust immune response. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

