UPEIDA to sign 17 MoUs in Aero India for Rs 5,000 crore investment in defence corridor

Arvind Chauhan | TNN |  Feb 2, 2021, 23:28  IST

LUCKNOW: Uttar Pradesh has made a massive debut in Aero India, the grand aviation show held by the ministry of defence. The three-day event will start in Bengaluru on Wednesday. Uttar Pradesh expressways industrial development authority (UPEIDA) is set to sign 17 MoUs (memorandum of understanding), attracting close to Rs 5,000 crore investment in UP defence corridor. Firms such as SMPP Group, Royal Sales Pvt Ltd, Maheshwari Wires Pvt Ltd, PTC Industries Ltd, Anshu Metal and Polymers, Saru Defence and Security Systems, Nitrodynamics Aerospace and Defence Pvt Ltd, Kalyani Strategic Systems, Optic Electronic Indian Pvt Ltd, MKU Pvt Ltd and Datum Advanced Composites are expected to sign MoUs. According to UPEIDA, the 13 private companies which are going to invest Rs 4,501 crore are expected to generate 9,000 direct jobs. Apart from them, the Indian Air Force, HAL, Naini Aerospace Ltd, a subsidiary of HAL, and Bharat Earth Movers Ltd will also sign MoUs with UPEIDA. UPEIDA, the nodal agency of the state government for defence industrial corridor, claims to have completed close to 90% land acquisition in four of six districts marked for the project. This includes 94% land in Jhansi, 96% land in Chitrakoot, 92% in Aligarh and 81% in Kanpur. Defence corridor is proposed to be set up in 3,525 hectares of land in Bundelkhand region. Media advisor for UPEIDA Durgesh Upadhyay said, "Firms which will sign MoUs have to pay 10% fee of the total land cost which they need for manufacturing units. In return, UPEIDA will provide them roads, electricity, and other basic amenities to ensure ease of doing business." UPEIDA has signed MoUs with 25 companies to invest in Aligarh, with proposed investment of Rs 1,500 crore. A defence park is proposed on 213 hectares of land in Kanpur, he added. "In Lucknow, HAL and Bharat Dynamics Ltd have demanded about 250 acres of land. Along with this, proposals from 5-6 small and medium industries have also been received. The district administration is trying to identify the land in Lucknow," he said. Proposals have also come from Tata Technology, Siemens and Dassault for establishment of central facility centre. An MoU between Indian Navy and UPEIDA has also been signed. With this, MSMEs and startups will be able to interact directly with the ‘buyer’ and customise their solutions. A centre of excellence established by UPEIDA, IIT BHU and IIT Kanpur will also work closely with Indian Navy, providing much needed synergy between the industry, academia and the user. Last year, in Lucknow Defence expo, UPEIDA signed 23 MoUs with an estimate investment of Rs 50,000 crore for Defence corridor. 

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

